[Music]
- you see radio time of useful
consciousness
[Music]
Michael Parenti God and his demons dr.
Michael Pawlenty is one of the nation's
leading progressive political analysts
he's a prolific author and engaging
speaker parent I grew up in a
conservative Catholic working-class
Italian community in New York City after
receiving his PhD in political science
from Yale he has taught at colleges and
universities in the US and abroad he
risked and ended his academic career
when he openly opposed the war on
Vietnam you are about to hear a
recording of perrenties first talk on
his most recent book God and his demons
this 2010 book covers the many evils
committed in the name of godly virtue
throughout history and the threat posed
by fundamentalists and theocratic
reactionaries yes Michael Pawlenty this
is the book we're going to talk about
tonight God and his demons
once you see the movie here you'll
probably want to read the book of hope
but the mainstream reviews have been
especially hostile far more so than say
to Hitchens or Dawkins we've noticed
some people who pointed out and we think
it's because I'm a leftist and my my
book is probably less sharply angrily
atheistic than theirs but what what I
really dislike was the kind of the ad
hominem and the dishonest and the
misrepresenting things that that went
into a few of those reviews for instance
one of the things now is in capital
letters for the New Atheists without a
new how does a new atheist differ from
their old atheists but I'm not even sure
I'm an atheist I'm not even sure I'm an
agnostic I'm not even sure I'm a
disbeliever or a believer you're not
gonna buy this book if I confess all
these things to you but I'm gonna do it
anyway
years ago Clarence Darrow the great
American lawyer he said I don't believe
in God it was that after the famous
Scopes trial you remember that said I
don't believe in God for the same reason
I don't believe in the tooth fairy
and I thought that was a very you know
that was a very frivolous offhand way of
talking about the thing and then later
on I thought well that that's actually a
very profound statement he's saying I
mean the tooth fairy is so improbably
that I just can't can't give it any kind
of credence but you know that's also why
I can't disbelieve in God because I
can't I can't disbelieve in the Tooth
Fairy can you can you actually get up
and start arguing against the existence
of the Tooth Fairy or the Easter Bunny
so I'll give you ten reasons why the
Easter Bunny doesn't really exist I mean
people are gonna look at you you know
and they're gonna say oh poor guy in
other words if this concept is not
worthy of your belief it's also not even
worthy of your disbelief it's like I
don't even I can't even get close to the
cinema so so I suppose there should be a
new category if they say well then what
are you I'll just say noted author or
something I know I don't know but what I
think you see is if you want to get down
to it I do think there are and I think
we all do and this this is what's
unsatisfactory about the the totally
materialist position although I am a
philosophical materialist in terms of
social history and all that I do not
believe that their ideas or forces that
act independently of all material forces
ideational forces unto themselves that
are creating situations although ideas
if mobilized and propagated can become
material forces we all know that
propaganda media and all that we're
dealing with these very real things
impacting on us but philosophical
materialism you always have to use the
ad
philosophical in front of it because
materialism has come to mean in our
common parlance it's come to mean you
know people who like big refrigerators
and big cars and a lot of money in also
they the philosophical materialism
really explains it all but it doesn't
explain the cosmos it doesn't explain
what's out there and what all that is
and on that I turn to Albert Einstein a
very great physicist and here's and I've
got him quoted right in the early pages
he was one of those people who pondered
the imponderables and and I have a lot
of respect instead of most materialist
friends just say that's beyond the scope
of anything with that is not to be
comprehended and I can't discuss it with
you and our state of scientific
knowledge is such that we cannot explain
all of that yet but someday we will Yeah
right
this is what Einstein says he says and I
got it right here on page 12 try and
penetrate without limited means the
secret of nature
now I Stein feels he has limited means I
mean if he feels limited about
contemplating the universe you can bet
universe is a big job right
he says try the unlimited means try and
penetrate the secret of nature and you
will find that behind all the
discernible laws and connections there
remains something subtle intangible and
inexplicable veneration for this force
beyond anything that we can comprehend
is my religion in other words he is at
awed by the magnitude and incredible
scope of the cosmos and that's sort of
where I am Stephen Hawking's the another
great physicist he resorts to a
theological idiom to express a
scientific effort his book on landmark
mathematical achievement is called God
created the integers
the integers are formations of numbers
that you know you don't invent you just
you discover them and work them out but
they're there you know where does that
come from what is that all about so
there is that great wonderment there is
these imponderables there is this great
cosmos some people insist upon calling
that God if they want to call that God
they can call it God it gets down to two
different views of theism
or deism I really should say because the
Deus does not really follow a theology
most of the founding fathers were deists
and they did not describe to a
denomination or secular religion and
very much war against all religions
contrary to the myth that our founding
fathers found that a Christian nation or
something like that I discussed that
briefly in here but in Weston D ISM
there are two basic traditions there's
the God of rational totality immutable
and cosmic impersonal and without
deliberate demands a pure creative force
with an evolving design or what Hegel
called the veldt dice the world spirit
that just manifests itself and it's and
eventually it actually manifests itself
in two forms of cosmic energy and that
energy creates matter and that matter
evolves into a combination of energy and
matter that creates consciousness and
consciousness evolves into self
consciousness that is forms of
consciousness that literally can reflect
upon themselves as we human beings do
which is a a trait as far as we know as
far as we know a trait that only we have
I mean as brilliant as whales and
porpoises and gorillas and chimpanzees
may prove to be they they usually do not
sit and discourse about the discourse
you know and
you know when Jim can't turn to another
and say define your terms you know or
something like that all right so there's
that kind of God then there's the other
God and that's what the rest of the book
is about the rest of the book is about
this other God and that's the
judeo-christian god or or or the god
known as Allah or he's given also two
different names a Yahweh Jehovah the
Lord our God and all other personalized
God heads who act directly and
anthropomorphic Allah upon history with
moods of love jealousy favoritism and
judgmental rage that second God is the
one that has a grip on this world and on
this species known as human beings for
the most part that's the God that has
sent hundreds of thousands of people to
their death death by fire death by
torture death by being torn apart death
by being thrown the dungeons or having
or getting cut open in pieces that God
that God is is the one who bolsters
regiments of conservative fundamentalist
who continually conjure up images of him
it's always him never her or it but him
as the Almighty patriarch and protector
the winner of wars Punisher of impiety
divine dispenser of rewards to those who
adore him also a winner of football
games I've seen that you ever see that
the coach with the high school football
team in the gym just before they go out
to play and the old nearly old Lord
let's go let's go and beat the side of
high score the other high school and why
let's go do it
let's go yeah yeah now armed with guys
holy Christ God is in favor of this new
jersey high school team as opposed as
opposed to that new jersey high school
team what do you know qey got what god
has if he's got he has his fingers in
everything right and um
he's intolerant furiously proselytizing
often corrupt has evil adherents who are
the object of my critical attention in
these pages ahead which is not to say
that all religious people are evil or
corrupt there are many very nice decent
wonderful people who are in religion and
such when you write about religion you
find your writing about you discover you
if you're writing about intolerance
hatred violence predatory sex money let
me say that one again money did you ever
see the George Carlin of routine when
you go home tonight get on YouTube just
kiddin
George Carlin it's called religion is
bull that's it that's the title of it oh
we're being filmed I said religion is
bull okay he says he starts off like
this may he rest in peace the beautiful
man he says there's a lot of people you
know that whiskey voicing huh it's a lot
of people who believe there's a man in
the sky who knows everything you're
doing and everything you're thinking and
he's all around and he can take care of
everything and all that but he needs
money he's gotta have money he's
all-powerful all creative he's the
source of creating everything and
everything that happens but he just
can't handle money so you gotta give him
more and more and more and he sent all
these representatives down to earth to
take it from us and take it you know and
in exchange you'll do a little favor for
you now and then you know I got to work
on my George Carlin intake
my life well in the opening chapters
which I had the most delightful time
writing them because I got access to a
book someone brought to my attention sir
it really is a remarkable remarkable
book that I mean is so revealing all
which I recommend all of you to take a
look at it's called the Holy Bible you
haven't seen it it is a book written by
Mad Men
it is really yeah I mean I don't
understand you see I was raised as a
Catholic and the Catholic hierarchy is
very cautious on the Bible they don't
encourage Catholics three to Bible I
never heard a priest ever say go home
and read your Bible they never said it
they always say you read to read the
passage we selected for you that they
have a beautiful beautifully written do
a the do a version of the Bible is the
Catholic but but I used only through
this I used the King James because that
has been the literary foundation of our
language and that's the Bible that most
American fundamentals Protestants still
used to this day is the King James
Version all our phrases expressions you
know salt of the earth all of them come
from the Bible and and this Bible is is
really full of mayhem and misery and war
and it's a it's a horrible thing but it
was great fun writing about that then I
noticed that everybody loves Jesus all
sorts of people who don't like the Bible
and don't like the Old Testament and
think it's horrible they all talk about
what a sweetheart Jesus was now here's a
here's another that's you should read
the thing called a New Testament read it
read the four Gospels the guy is not
that sweet I'm sorry he has there's the
Sermon on the Mount which is beautiful
there's love thy neighbor as thyself and
you know and have regard for the poor
although he really wasn't all that
regarding for the poor
he skulls the rich and says rich man
can't get to heaven through like through
the eye of a camel or it tells one rich
guy you want you want to find meaning
give away all your wealth and follow me
you know what the rich guy does when he
says that gets up and flees and runs
away hugging his possessions I have a
chapter called the other face of our
sweet Savior and and if you read through
it you find that Jesus is absolutely
obsessed that you must believe in him
and go through him he makes repeated
claims I've had people say to me you
know Jesus never said he was the son of
God he said he was the son of man that's
not true he says he's the son of God
repeatedly through the Bible and he says
that only through me can you get there
he nobody talks about the fires of hell
as often as furiously as Jesus Christ
he's talking about how the gates to hell
are wide and the multitudes shall go
down into the eternal flames whereas the
gates to heaven are narrow and only the
elect shall be chosen Calvin was all
right that wasn't Calvinism he got that
right from Jesus and there's all sorts
of things he talks about when when
brother shall be killing brother and son
shall kill father and father shall
killed son talking about in anticipation
of this thing coming up and happening
very soon the other good press he gets
is for rum is for kicking out the money
changers from the temple
I understand the money changes were just
people who are trying to get who
exchanging current forms of currency so
that people could then go in and buy the
offerings and there were other people
selling little animals one of the things
that Judaism likes to do is murder
little innocent animals and then burn
them and set them on fire and apparently
their God Lord God Jehovah is is very
pleased by this and then I have a
chapter discovering what
anti-semitism and whatnots ISM was all
about it does have its roots in
Christianity there's just no doubt I
mean the evidence is so crushingly
overwhelming and I marshal some of it in
this book I even have a thing called
paving the way for Adolph just about
everything the Nazis tried had been
tried by the Christians against the Jews
over 1500 years or so everything
ghettoization a stigma mark wearing an
emblem identifying who you are driven
out of a profession massacred corralled
being accused of being Christ killers
and all that all that stuff and then
there's a chapter called working his
blunders in mysterious ways which I had
a lot of fun writing it you can imagine
they call these book readings and there
are authors who actually do read but I
to do that I do say here the
judeo-christian God fashioned a bipedal
creature endowed with the potential for
every kind of knavery who preys upon
fellow humans and other animals often
with little regard for the misery
inflicted indeed the misery inflicted is
sometimes part of the gratification in
some this omnipotent omniscient all
perfect deity is himself no
perfectionist he might have done better
had he taken more than six days to put
the universe together as one wit put it
God is an underachiever I'm I mean look
around this is a botched job you know I
mean just earthquakes tsunamis
everything you want to talk about you
know and being omniscient God knows
everything that has happened and will
happen he doesn't have to wait to see
how the future plays out the way we do
so he knows all things to all time so
when he first created us humans he must
have been aware of the crimes and
horrors that we would commit often in
his name
so if this is freewill and it's our
responsibility who told him to give us
freewill what was that about
and why why do you give such imperfect
creatures freewill
am I being overly harsh on the Almighty
I don't think so it's it's all it's all
right there in the Bible and okay let's
see I do a treat the whole question of
creationism and intelligent design it's
a really interesting thing because it
raises questions about science and the
scientific method and you know the
creationist say I can remember one of
the earliest most pronounced
creationists one of the more prominent
ones was a man I think you all known his
name was Ronald Reagan and I remember
him saying he said he said evolution is
not a fact it's a theory and that's
their that's their favorite argument you
know evolution is not a fact it's a
theory and what I try to point out is
that that's a misuse of what fact in
theory are when you that's a layman's
view that theory is just some
speculative thing you spin off the top
of your head oh my theory is this that
or the other thing but in fact in
science theory is the gold standard
that's what you go for you go for
developing a theory that helps organize
facts and gives you explanatory power
over those facts so facts serve theory
and theory serves facts it's a it's an
interrelationship so it is to treat them
as mutually exclusive and say evolution
is just a theory it's not a fact you
know well the theory of gravitation is
just a theory so you're gonna go step
off the fifth floor to test it and the
theory of relativity and all sorts of
other theories and all these scientific
theories have incompletions unanswered
questions in fact what every scientific
breakthrough you answer certain things
and then you have about 20 more other
unanswered questions
and it goes on there are many scientists
who don't even like the term scientific
law they don't call it a law the law of
gravitation they rather call it the
theory of gravitation I think there are
people now who even questioning
gravitation aren't they that is they're
saying it's not a magnetic pull from the
center of Earth it's the press of the
atmosphere once you get out of that and
sphere you go floating around sounds
very plausible to I mean I don't know
enough about it well intelligent design
I had fun with that and I said well how
intelligent is the design we gave some
examples that said let's take the human
body we are quadrupeds who have been
tilted up on our hind legs and we now
walk and we have a curvature in the
spine which really doesn't sufficiently
compensate for for this as a Lisa fulham
said perhaps the god of intelligent
design has a special place in his plan
for chiropractors you know it's in the
book I got a lot of gags in the book to
keep me to keep him laughing keep him
laughing and then there's the knee and
he went on well one one really poorly
rigged jerry-built mess is the male
urinary tract
you know the male urinary tract goes
right down the middle of the prostate
gland and the prostate gland with age
tends to expand and it puts the squeeze
on the urinary tract and there are very
few older men who have felt any kind of
awe or admiration for this arrangement
I can tell you that as a fact while
we're down in the lower regions of the
body take the fact you know that we that
the on both men and women the
elimination process and the procreative
process are right on top of each other
you know and and the joke goes that God
must have been a a civil engineer
because who else would situate a major
waste disposal system right next to a
prime recreational site am i being
irreverent Darwin himself you know was
not at all impressed by evolution he was
horrified by it he talked about quote
the clumsy wasteful blundering low and
hardly cruel works of nature well I'll
let it go like that we you know I made
my I made a point there few jabs move on
the book also takes down some icons
including john paul ii i feel the guy
was a murderer he destroyed liberation
theology he packed the College of
Cardinals with right-wing reactionaries
one of the most notable was rat singer
who is now benedict xvi another icon his
mother Teresa talked about her one of
the first books written in the West was
Hitchens a very thin slim volume on
mother Teresa which pointed out that she
was less than a spiritual leader that
her hospital in Calcutta wasn't really
much of a hospital people were dying in
it like flies there's a woman named and
Siva who wrote a very laudatory book
about Mother Teresa and said she was a
virgin and then gets into some of the
same things and says and then you get to
about page 114 for and then she starts
letting go with all sorts of other
evidence that
comes up the fact that people went into
this hospital and many of them could
live there Weston medical assistants who
came and said wait a minute you're just
leaving them all to die but some of
these people have treatable illnesses
that that can be cured and she said God
will take care of it I will take care of
it and and you know people came forward
and said how about some anesthetics and
painkillers
she said pain is God kissing the poor or
kissing the sick and that when Mother
Teresa herself got sick she took a
private jet to the state-of-the-art
Clinics of leading clinics in Europe and
in the US she was so holy that she
didn't need to be kissed by God and his
and the pain when she died they
discovered her Diaries and she was full
of doubt as to whether there is a God
she talked about darkness she said where
is it I'm wrong actually I thought that
was the more human likable side of
mother Teresa I think the worst moment
for me with mother Teresa was when she
went to Bhopal and there were just
crowds of people lying's suffering
horrible illnesses and death and she was
walking among them and shouting forgive
forgive that accident and that horrible
thing was was unforgivable I also have
some critical stuff in here on the dali
lama's tibet and let me tell you the
loving tibet buddhist adherents who have
written me some very unloving letters as
a - a love forgiveness kissy huggy come
on what's the matter don't get so solo
it wasn't against the dalai lama in
particular by the way the dalai lama is
a mixed he's a mixed picture he said I'm
half Marxist and half Buddhist which
really caused some people to get upset
they said if I if I get back I'm gonna
get rid of you Zuri and inherited debt
and what I found what old Tibet was that
it was a feudal system it had serfdom it
had slavery it had amassed wealth of
secular Lords and religious Lamas it had
a system of these monks going around the
peasant house
and plucking out nine-year-old boys to
take them up for recreational purposes
or to recruit them as being monks or to
use them in other ways servants or or
soldiers had an awful lot of poverty the
the serfs were taxed for everything
taxed if they got married taxed if
somebody died tax if somebody was born
taxed if if they had to go to another
town looking for a job taxed if they had
a job tax if they didn't have a job and
debts as in all feudal systems the
peasantry is heavily chained by debts
and these debts are inherited the Dalai
Lama came out against inherited debts
he's not a pacifist by the way for him
the jury is still out on Iraq he's very
close to the CIA that's public knowledge
I got citations there from such hidden
leftist publications as The Washington
Post in the San Francisco Chronicle
Woods he got money from the CIA he his
brother works for the two of his
brothers worked for CIA friends he gets
money from the Indian Secret Service and
he gets money he gets money from George
Soros and then there's stuff on the
pedophile problem John Paul John Paul
the second totally ignored the pedophile
problem and the and the reports for 20
years he refused to meet with victims I
mean he was worse than Benedict Benedict
has learned you know he means with Sammy
says word says if this is a crime and
this has been terrible and all and we
have to we have to realize that this
pedophilia is a crime it hurts people
children are beautiful children are so
lovable they're the spirit the hope for
life you got to leave them alone there
are boundaries you cannot you cannot
violate each other and that's what
that's what that's what comes out in the
hope that a failure thing is nobody
talks about the price that the victims
pay often a lifetime of depression and
eating disorders drug addiction
alcoholism sexual dysfunction all sorts
of problems that the church was too busy
defending the victimizer to concern
themselves about the victims in that
process we see is still playing out
right now in the headlines I also note
in the book that they were Protestant
pedophiles that it's not particularly
because you have a celibate priesthood
or anything like that
celibacy has nothing to do with
pedophilia celibacy and homosexuality
has nothing to do with pedophilia
pedophilia has to do with pedophilia and
the reason you have somebody you had all
these priests is because the rabbets go
where the lettuce patches is the same
reason why you go to the cya and you'll
find pedophiles the the California Youth
Association were these troubled kids and
orphans they get raped regularly by the
staff that's where they go they go to
that they go to daycare centers they go
to various things and they go to single
mothers with kids they go and the whole
story has yet to be told about
pedophilia we're just scraping the
surface we've yet to get to the incest
forms of pedophilia which are probably
involve millions of people it's the same
like with the abuse and violence against
women that has to be treated like a
crime you know if a man goes up to
another man on the street and beats him
up and kicks him and knocks him down and
breaks his jaw and blackens his eye and
breaks his rib he can get arrested and
he can be facing nine to ten years for
felonious assault with intent to commit
a serious physical injury nine to ten
years if he does it to his girlfriend or
his wife or his spouse at home a whole
new vocabulary kicks in it's called
abuse it's called domestic court it's
called he needs therapy no no no no he
needs to know that if he lays a hammer
on that woman he's facing
Prison that is a very good therapeutic
curative again it really works they have
to be kept from their victims and they
also have to be deterred instead the
church has been and I think it's a
diversionary tactic they've been
bringing up homosexuality when
homosexuality was never the issue
homosexuality is a sin an abomination a
personal disorder a personal evil is
what the word Benedict called it I have
a whole chapter in here about the pious
politico's about all the that was also
fun to write about all those Republican
family value guys who get caught in
men's rooms you know with no trace of
family around and getting involved in
other things I talked about various
religious cults like Scientology
Mormonism Reverend moon Scientology is
wonderful as ever started by ron Hubbard
that brings back the George Carlin thing
about money Hubbard was a science
fiction writer who would write these
books for any get a penny a word and he
said what the hell is this yeah I'm
working for peanuts I wrote his old book
and I I made a few thousand dollars and
he said the way to really get rich is to
start your own religion he understood he
needs money and and he did die he did
die quite rich and all and then I take
on the question of what what what is
really wrong about these religions for
most of us is that I don't care if they
want to believe in these things I feel
sorry for the people get in it
I also they don't have a right to
victimize any of even their own members
even grown members but also it is the
theocratic aspects of it that is the
tendency to use state power to advance
the interests of this religion the
tendency to say that I am going to take
over this world and set you straight
that's a totalitarian fundamentalism
which you find in fundamentalist
Christian you find it among
the Islamic militants and the like and
the logic is I believe I have this faith
that this is the one real truth and I
believe it if I didn't think it was true
I wouldn't believe it so of course it's
true now if that's true then what you're
preaching is false
and you are then leading people astray
what you're putting at risk is their
very souls they're very eternal
existence so you are propagating an evil
and you have to be restrained in some
way and therefore it's not a necessary
evil but it's an absolute virtual for me
to eradicate you or your efficacy or
your freedoms or some way to do that let
me read to you one right-wing American
fundamentalist leader a lot of you know
his name Randall Terry this is what he
told an audience of like-minded faithful
this on page 183 I want you to just let
a wave of intolerance wash over you
our goal is a Christian nation we are
called by God to conquer this country we
don't want equal time we don't want
pluralism you see hey subha Alice that's
what this is Gary north
Gary North is a leading
reconstructionist theocratic
he looks for the day when only
Christians will have the right to vote
and those who refuse to submit publicly
to religious rule will be denied
citizenship north and his theocrats are
working to construct quote a Bible based
social political and religious order
which finally denies the religious
liberty of the enemies of God see if you
don't believe you're an enemy of God so
and the the Islamic extremists the same
thing Islam instructs you to wage jihad
against the non
believe it that's to protect God and to
protect the one true religion so this is
what we face the only reason we are safe
right now is because they don't have
enough people on this side to believe
the way they do so it is there's a real
ideological struggle going on here and
that struggle should be really taken
seriously I talked about in my document
the fundamentalist takeover of the US
Air Force Academy about 20 years ago I
spoke at the Air Force Academy they were
using one of my books in the political
science department there I could never
go to the Air Force Academy now they
used to have a two Protestant ministers
a Catholic and a rabbi that's what their
clergy they've now added ten
fundamentalist ministers to the Academy
even though its size has gotten shorter
that's all in the book they've been
badgering cadets to attend certain
chapels and indoctrination sessions and
all that sort of thing and they have
officer groups and they have connections
with people of similar tendency in West
Point and the like this is all being
done with our taxpayer dollars by the
way to subsidize religions to become
ever more powerful and their their sense
of tolerance does not expand with their
sense of their own power quite the
contrary
as their sense of power grows they
become increasingly increasingly
impatient and wonder why do we have to
tolerate any of this anymore
so our job really is to not only hold
them at bay but to try to move them back
now there is I want to end right now
here this grim story I've been giving
you by pointing out there are some
hopeful signs the Pew Forum on Religion
I found that over 48 million Americans
reported having no religious affiliation
a 2009 survey last year found that
non-affiliated is the fastest growing
minority in the country
yay-yay those who claim no religion or
the only demographic group that
increased in all 50 states over the last
two decades their numbers have doubled
since 1990 that's also probably partly
because people feel free to admit that
they have no religion which itself is a
good sign that means the climate of
opinion 2 is also a change and I write
as follows
we hear that America is a deeply
religious nation but many apparent
believers seem to have only a hazy grasp
of religious credo and are less than
certain about what they actually believe
religious affiliation for millions of
people is little more than nominal
respondents are telling the pollsters
that they go to church in far greater
numbers than they actually do I mean
they just literally are not enough
churches in America to haul all the
people to say oh yeah I go to church and
you can go on and many of the people who
are affiliated are quite tolerant of
other people's religions and say no
other there are other ways to god it
doesn't have to be my religion so that's
a very hopeful thing good my opposition
is not that you believe in this thing
but it's that that you're going to
infringe upon other people's beliefs or
you're going to exercise coercive forms
of power for destructive forms of power
over other people including for instance
covering up pedophiles for example there
was a conference held at the a place
called university of california berkeley
in 2005 on spiritual activism it was
attended by 1200 people they called for
turning society away from materialism
and selfishness and exposing the
manipulative and opportunistic use of
religion by political conservatives
there's a lot in the book here about
about that televangelists in' and all
that one of them says there's a silent
majority out there progressives and
moderates who saw how religion was being
used in the last election and they're
saying hey I'm a person of faith and
that's not what I believe another
conference 150
religious leaders met in San Francisco
in 2008 to promote peace and tolerance
in the words of one United Church of
Christ which used to be considered a
fundamentalist Calvinist denomination it
isn't anymore it seems the United Church
of Christ has now really mainstream
wouldn't everybody agree with that like
Methodists and Baptists and so this
minister he says from United Church of
Christ we're trying to get people to
stop killing each other in the name of
God that's a laudable ambition I would
say okay I'm going to close the book by
talking about just two two individuals
from the sixteenth century one of them I
dedicated this book to Giordano Bruno
Giordano Bruno was a Dominican monk who
insisted that people of different
religious persuasions should respect
each other's freedom of conscience we're
talking like 1580 you know you know you
talk like that what happens to you and
it did happen to him he was burned at
the stake in the year 1600 Giordano
Bruno rejected the divinity of Christ
and the virginity of Mary so he
eventually was kicked out of that he was
a heretic 'el Dominican monk he did to
the heliocentric theory of Copernicus
that the Sun was the center of our solar
system not only that but he envisioned a
vast cosmos of countless heliocentric
worlds and not too many people the
sixteenth century were up on that in
other words he was saying our Sun is a
star and all those other stars are Suns
he even went further he said the
universe is of such unimaginable
magnitude that it is beyond
comprehension that's the position today
of astrophysicist you remember about
three years ago they were saying we're
reaching the outer boundaries of the
universe with space folds in on itself
now they're saying oh we just looked
over there over that and there's like
more beyond
this is like so beyond anything I mean
totally awesome and I guess they don't
like physicists don't talk that way
their daughter's story they should
that's right
but here was here was run out back in
the 1580s 1590s saying these things you
know and he said he maintained that God
whom the church trumpeted as an entity
distinctly apart from the material world
God endeared within the very elements of
the biosphere which is again a heretical
view but one which which actually people
adhere to today so he was brought before
the Inquisition of court he was actually
put before the Vatican Court the
Cardinal presider of him was guy named
Roberto that allowed me know
Roberto better Amino is interesting
because he says he's the same one who
almost killed Galileo
if you ever he breaks play by Bellamy no
figures in it and he says the guy he
says the Galileo look you gotta you
gotta get back in line otherwise you're
gonna end up like Giordano Bruno and
Braille I mean I should know it well I
mean oh this murderer this guy who
killed people was made a saint you might
all happy to know that in 1930 something
as a defender of the faith Bruno was
burned alive and in the Campo de Fiori
in Rome campo de fiori in 1604 hundred
years later to the day whole group of
people Italians have such good memories
I don't know a whole bunches of people
came mostly China but there were other
people from other countries too on the
day 400 years later to the day and put
flowers down by Bruno Stachel there's a
statue of Giordano Bruno right at the
spot where he had been burned well let
me I'll read you what I said in 2000 to
mark the 400th anniversary of Bruno's
death hundreds of rationalist agnostics
atheists and pantheists gathered before
his statue in Rome's Campo de Fiori
the site of his execution to lay flowers
they demonstrated that deep conviction
and strong history
our cool memory are as much if not more
the province of those who believe in
freedom of conscience as of those who
salivate for orthodoxy then I just want
to end with the last guy
this one is a devout conservative Roman
Catholic and politically conservative he
was a monarchist and his name was
Michele de Montaigne well-known
Montagnes essays that considered a
classic there were some remarkable
passages and here's one of them from
this is from now this conservative
monarchist Orthodox Catholic Roman Roman
Catholic and he says I do not suffer
from that common failing of judging
another man by me I can easily believe
that others have qualities quite
distinct from my own I can conceive and
believe that there are thousands of
different ways of living he goes on to
declare himself contrary to most men I'm
ready to contemplate another human being
simply as he is free from comparisons my
one desire is that each of us should be
judged apart and that conclusions about
me or anyone else should not be drawn
from routine exemplar he hardly
qualifies as a secular humanist given
his belief but I call him a sacred
pluralist if I can coin a phrase here so
he sees the hand of God not in the
punitive monochrome imposed by
theocratic authorities but in the richly
diverse blossoming of human beings so
long as they don't harm others and in
the thousands of different ways of
living
that's a Montaigne phrase so that's what
that's what he had he had an orthodoxy
that transcended itself an orthodoxy
that invited us to live alongside it
rather than under it I can live with
such an orthodoxy that's fine if you
want to be off the docks be Orthodox so
let me just read then to you the last
three paragraphs
this book in the years to come millions
of people will continue to turn to
religion for solace and inner peace for
transcendence and expanded consciousness
and for promised protection against the
terrors of death and life for many souls
religion will ever remain a haven in a
heartless world which was Marxist phrase
the very best we can do and all that we
should want to do is roll back the
theocratic aggrandizement while
strengthening our right to entertain our
beliefs and disbeliefs openly and with
impunity only secular strength and
organized democratic activism on our
part will counter the sectarian
intolerance and state assistant tyranny
of reactionary theocrats will the future
ever arrive we used to think so
whatever the pessimism now afloat we
must maintain an optimism of the will we
must not only hope but also struggle for
that time when the better angels of our
nature shall prevail and God's demons
are put to rest so that's the end of the
book thank you that's the end of the
talk
you heard part two of a one-hour talk by
dr. Michael Pawlenty on God and his
demons Parenti is among our leading
progressive political analysts he serves
on the board of judges for Project
Censored and is the author of 22 books
among them democracy for the few
contrary notions super patriotism
history as mystery and dirty truth you
can hear this program again on tu si
radios website T you see radio
org that's T you see radio dot o-r-g
look under newest programs you can get
information on how to order an audio CD
or a film on DVD of Michael Pavan T God
and his demons by calling one seven zero
seven four six three two six five four
and I will repeat that number in a
moment t you see video is free to all
radio stations and depends on the
support of listeners like you your
donation CD or dvd order keeps this
program on the air call anytime at 7:07
for six three two six five four for
information on how to order you can get
your CD or DVD of God and his demons by
mail or credit card by phone or online
on T you see videos secure website T you
see radio dot o-r-g my name is Mariah
Gilardi
thank you for listening give us a call
[Music]